MAN: One learns that the
world, though made, is
yet being made, that this is
still the morning of creation,
that mountains long conceived
and now being born brought to
light by the glaciers,
channels traced for rivers,
basins hollowed for lakes.
When we try to pick out
anything by itself, we find it
hitched to everything
else in the universe.
The whole wilderness
in unity and interrelation
is alive and familiar.
The very stones
seem talkative,
sympathetic, brotherly.
Everybody needs beauty,
as well as bread, places to
play in and pray in, where
nature may heal and give
strength to body
and soul alike.
This natural beauty hunger
is made manifest in our
magnificent national parks...
nature's sublime wonderlands,
the admiration and joy
of the world.
John Muir.
PETER COYOTE: They are
a treasure house of nature's
superlatives, 84 million
acres of the most stunning
landscapes anyone
has ever seen...
including: a mountain so
massive it creates its own
weather, whose peak rises more
than 20,000 feet above
sea level, the highest point
on the continent...
a valley where a river
disappears into burning sands
282 feet below sea level,
the lowest and hottest
location in the hemisphere...
a labyrinth of caves longer
than any other ever measured...
and the deepest lake
in the nation
with the clearest water
in the world.
They contain trees dead
for 225 million years
that are now solid rock...
and trees still growing that
were already saplings before
the time of Christ, before
Rome conquered the known
world, before the Greeks
worshipped in the Parthenon,
before the Egyptians built
the pyramids, trees that are
the oldest
living things on Earth
and the tallest and the largest.
They encompass a mile-deep
gash in the ground, where the
Hopis say the first people
emerged from the underworld
and where scientists say
a river has patiently carved its
way to expose rocks that are
1.7 billion years old,
nearly half the age
of the planet itself...
and an island where a goddess
named Pele destroys everything
in her path while she
simultaneously gives birth
to new land.
They preserve cathedrals
of stone gaily ornamented
by cascading ribbons
of water...
Arctic dreamscapes where
the rivers are made of ice...
and a geological wonderland
with rivers that steam,
mud that boils amidst
the greatest collection
of geysers in the world.
They became the last refuge
for magnificent species
of animals that otherwise
would have vanished forever...
and they remain a refuge
for human beings seeking to
replenish their spirit,
geographies of memory and hope
where countless American
families have forged
an intimate connection to
their land and then passed it
along to their children.
MAN: I think that deep in our
DNA is this embedded memory
of when we were not separated
from the rest of the natural
world, that we
were part of it.
The Bible talks about
the Garden of Eden as that
experience that we had at the
beginnings of our dimmest
memories as a species, and so
when we enter a park, we're
entering a place that has
been--at least the attempt has
been made to keep it like it
once was, and we cross that
boundary, and suddenly,
we're no longer masters
of the natural world.
We're part of it,
and in that sense,
it's like we're going home.
It doesn't matter
where we're from.
We've come back to a place
that is where we came from.
MAN: It is the preservation of
the scenery, of the forests,
and the wilderness game for
the people as a whole instead
of leaving the enjoyment
thereof to be confined to
the very rich.
It is noteworthy in its
essential democracy, one
of the best bits of national
achievement which our people
have to their credit, and our
people should see to it that
they are preserved for their
children and their children's
children forever with their
majestic beauty all unmarred.
Theodore Roosevelt.
COYOTE: But they are more
than a collection of rocks
and trees and inspirational
scenes from nature.
They embody something less
tangible yet equally enduring,
an idea born in the
United States nearly a century
after its creation,
as uniquely American as
the Declaration of Independence
and just as radical.
MAN: What could be more
democratic than owning
together the most magnificent
places on your continent?
Think about Europe.
In Europe, the most
magnificent places,
the palaces, the parks,
are owned by aristocrats,
by monarchs, by the wealthy.
In America, magnificence is
a common treasure.
That's the essence
of our democracy.
COYOTE: "National parks,"
the writer and historian
Wallace Stegner once said,
"are the best idea
we've ever had."
MAN: It's not the best idea.
The best idea came from
Thomas Jefferson, that all human
beings, irrespective of the
accident of their birth,
are entitled to enjoy the
aspirations of being fully
complete and free
human beings.
That's America's gift
to the world,
but right up there
are the national parks.
Jefferson, I think, would say
if you go out into the heart
of America and see this
continent in its glory,
it will embolden
you to dream
about the possibilities of life,
that American nature is
the guarantor of American
Constitutional freedom,
that if you don't have
a genuine link to nature
in a serious,
even profound way,
you can't be an American.
COYOTE: Like the idea
of America itself, full
of competing demands and
impulses, the national park
idea has been constantly
debated, constantly tested,
and is constantly evolving,
ultimately embracing places
that also preserve the
nation's first principles,
its highest aspirations,
its greatest sacrifices,
even reminders of its
most shameful mistakes.
Most of all, the story of the
national parks is the story
of people, people from every
conceivable background,
rich and poor,
famous and unknown, soldiers
and scientists, natives and
newcomers, idealists, artists,
and entrepreneurs, people
who were willing to devote
themselves to saving some
precious portion of the land
they loved and in doing so
reminded their fellow citizens
of the full meaning
of democracy.
From the very beginning as
they struggled over who should
control their national parks,
what should be allowed within
their boundaries, even why
they should exist at all,
Americans have looked upon
these wonders of nature
and seen in them the
reflection of their own dreams.
MAN: One of the things I think
we witness when we go to the
parks is the immensity and
the intimacy of time.
On the one hand, we experience
the immensity of time,
which is the creation itself,
it is the universe unfolding
before us, and yet it is also
time shared with the people
that we visit these places
with, and so it's the
experience that we remember
when our parents took us
for the first time to these
and then we as parents passing
them on to our children,
a kind intimate transmission
from generation to generation
to generation of the love
of place, the love of nation
that the national parks are
meant to stand for.
[Birds chirping]
[Water running]
COYOTE: Early in 1851 during
the frenzy of the California
gold rush, an armed group of
white men was scouring the
western slopes of
the Sierra Nevada,
searching for Indians,
intent on driving them
from their homeland.
They called themselves the
Mariposa Battalion, and late
on the afternoon of March 27,
they came to a narrow valley
lined by towering granite
cliffs where a series
of waterfalls dropped
thousands of feet to reach
the Merced River
on the valley's floor.
One of the men, a young doctor
named Lafayette Bunnell stood
there transfixed.
MAN AS LAFAYETTE AS BUNNELL:
As I looked, a peculiar,
exalted sensation seemed
to fill my whole being,
and I found my eyes
in tears with emotion.
I said with some enthusiasm,
"I have here seen the power
"and glory
of the Supreme Being.
"The majesty of His handiwork
is in that testimony
"of the rocks."
COYOTE: Bunnell's enchantment
with the scenery was not
shared by the rest of the
Mariposa Battalion, who busied
themselves setting fire to
any Indian homes they found.
Before the Battalion moved on,
Bunnell convinced the others
that as the first white men
ever to enter the valley they
should give it a name.
He suggested Yosemite because
he thought that was the name
of the tribe they had
come to dispossess.
Later, scholars would learn
that the people living in
the valley called it Ahwahnee,
meaning the place of a gaping
mouth, and they called
themselves the Ahwahneechee.
Yosemite, it was learned,
meant something
entirely different.
In the native language,
Yosemite refers to people
who should be feared.
It means they are killers.
4 years later in 1855,
a second group of white people
entered Yosemite Valley,
this time as tourists,
not Indian fighters.
They were led by
James Mason Hutchings,
an energetic Englishman
who had failed miserably
as a prospector
during the gold rush.
Now he hoped to make a fortune
by promoting California's
scenic wonders through
an illustrated magazine.
When a report about the
Indian campaign in the Sierras
mentioned a waterfall
more than 1,000 feet high,
Hutchings rushed to see
it for himself.
Word and images of
Yosemite quickly spread.
Other tourists began
showing up to witness
its beauty firsthand.
The trip required a two-day
journey from San Francisco to
the nearest town and then,
with no wagon road into
the valley, a grueling 3-day
trek by foot or horseback up
and down steep mountainsides
on narrow, rocky paths.
But for most, the scenic
reward was worth the hardship.
"Looking at the majestic
cathedral rocks
"and cathedral spires,"
wrote a Massachusetts
newspaperman, "made it easy to
"imagine that you are under
the ruins of an old gothic
"cathedral to which those of
Cologne and Milan are
"but baby houses."
Upon seeing Yosemite Falls,
the highest free-leaping
waterfall on the continent,
another visitor began
quoting The Bible.
"Now let me die," he told his
companions, "for I am happy."
15 miles south of
Yosemite Valley,
the Mariposa Grove
of giant sequoias contains
the largest living things
on earth, trees
nearly 3,000 years old.
When Horace Greeley, editor
of the "New York Tribune,"
saw them, he boasted to his
readers that they were
"of substantial size when David
danced before the Ark."
Soon, the celebrated painter
Albert Bierstadt arrived
and produced a series
of masterpieces.
One of them would command
a price of $25,000, equal to
the highest amount ever paid
for an American work of art.
While Bierstadt painted,
his friend Fitz Hugh Ludlow
wrote dispatches that appeared
in "The Atlantic Monthly,"
the nation's most
prestigious magazine.
MAN AS FITZ HUGH LUDLOW:
We did not so much seem to be
seeing from that crag of
vision a new scene on the old
familiar globe as a new heaven
and a new earth into which
the creative spirit had
just been breathed.
I hesitate now, as I did then,
at the attempt to give my
vision utterance.
Never were words as beggared
for an abridged translation
of any scripture of nature.
JENKINSON: Jefferson looked
across America from the
portico at Monticello, and
he saw wilderness all the way
out, so he couldn't conceive
of a national park because,
for Jefferson, America
was a national park.
This country is Eden, and we
Americans had this glorious
opportunity to see the world
in its infancy so that America
in a sense had been kept as
a symbol of what
the world once was.
COYOTE: As Thomas Jefferson's
nation had grown,
the country's sense of itself
and its possibilities had
grown, as well, not only
in the political sphere
but in the arts, literature,
and in its citizens'
relationship to God.
MAN: At the gates of the
forest, the surprised man
of the world is forced to
leave his city estimates
of great and small,
wise and foolish.
The knapsack of custom falls
off his back with the first
step he takes.
Here is sanctity which shames
our religions and reality
which discredits our heroes.
Here, we find nature to be
the circumstance which dwarfs
every other circumstance
and judges like a god all men
that come to her.
Ralph Waldo Emerson.
COYOTE: The transcendentalist
writer Ralph Waldo Emerson had
been telling Americans for
years that God was more easily
found in nature than
in the works of man.
His disciple,
Henry David Thoreau,
had called for "little oases
of wildness in the desert
"of our civilization."
CRONON: What emerges in the
middle of the 19th Century is
this idea that going back to
wild nature is restorative,
it's a way of escaping the
corruptions of urban civilized
life, finding a more innocent
self, returning to who you
really are, returning to a
kind of authenticity, and if
you want to know God at
firsthand, the way to do that
is not to enter a cathedral,
not to open a book, but to go
to the mountaintop, and on the
mountaintop, there you will
see God as God truly is
in the world.
COYOTE: But it was all
in danger as the nation,
in the name of manifest
destiny, marched inexorably
across the continent,
systematically dispossessing
Indian peoples from their
homelands and transforming
the land to new uses.
The artist George Catlin
worried that the vast herds
of buffalo and the Indians who
depended on them would someday
be gone forever, and he called
for the creation of a nation's
park to save them both.
No one listened.
By the 1860s, the country's
most famous natural landmark,
Niagara Falls, had
already been nearly ruined.
Every overlook was owned by
a private landowner
charging a fee.
Tourists could expect to
be badgered and oftentimes
swindled by the hucksters
and self-appointed guides who
swarmed the railroad depot
and carriage stands.
European visitors publicly
belittled Americans
for allowing such a majestic
work of nature to become
blighted by commercial
development and offered it as
further evidence that the
United States was still
a backward,
uncivilized nation.
CRONON: Americans feel that
the United States is somehow
inferior to Europe, where the
United States doesn't have the
ruins of Rome or of Greece,
it doesn't have the Acropolis,
it doesn't have the Parthenon,
and so it seems like we're
an inferior nation, and yet
the one thing we do have is
a nature that looks closer to
the new morning of God's own
creation, closer to paradise
than anything that Europe has
to offer, and so the thought
is that if we're to preserve
anything that stands for the
glory of America, then these
overwhelmingly beautiful,
sacred spots are the ones we
ought to preserve.
COYOTE: On May 17, 1864,
in the midst of the Civil War,
with Union casualties
averaging 2,000 a day,
the junior senator from
California, John Conness,
rose to explain a bill
he had just introduced.
It had nothing to do
with the war that threatened
to destroy his nation.
MAN AS JOHN CONNESS: I will
state to the Senate that this
bill proposes to make a grant
of certain premises located
in the Sierra Nevada Mountains
in the state of California
that are for all public
purposes worthless but which
constitute perhaps some of the
greatest wonders of the world.
It is a matter involving
no appropriation whatever.
The property is of no
value to the government.
COYOTE: Conness' bill
proposed something totally
unprecedented in human history,
setting aside not
a landscaped garden or a
city park but a large tract
of natural scenery for the
future enjoyment of everyone.
More than 60 square miles of
federal land, encompassing
the Yosemite Valley and the
Mariposa Grove of big trees,
were to be transferred to
the care of the state
of California on the condition
that the land never be opened
for private ownership
and instead be preserved
for public use, resort,
and recreation.
After only a few questions
and no objections, the Senate
passed Conness' bill and
moved on to other business.
A month later, the House did
the same, and on June 30, 1864,
a day in which he also
signed bills increasing import
duties and broadening the
income tax in order to
continue a war to
preserve the Union,
President Abraham Lincoln signed
a law to preserve forever
a beautiful valley and a grove
of trees that he had never seen
thousands of miles
away in California.
JENKINSON: And so Lincoln,
who realizes that it's the
West that is the dynamo of
American life, it's the fuel
of American idealism--Lincoln
wants to save some significant
portions of it from what he
sees as the North's runaway
industrial idea of the
future of the continent.
In a sense, the whole history
of America is a lament that
this Garden of Eden which we
have discovered is going to
slip away from us somehow.
MAN: When I think of a grove
of giant sequoia, I think
of a cathedral or a church,
a place where you're not
necessarily worshipping
the name of something
but the presence
of something else.
There's no need for someone
to remind you that there is
something in this world
that is larger than you are
because you can see it,
and you look up in a storm,
and you can't even see
the rim of the valley.
All you can see our clouds
gathered there at the rim
of the valley, and Yosemite
Falls seems to flow out
of the clouds itself
as if out of nowhere.
It's a gathering place
of water, all the waters
of the sky flowing into that
one spot, which makes it
a gathering of life and a
gathering of spirit, as well,
and all of those things,
are flowing through Yosemite,
and so I think what better
place is there that has such
a confluence of so many
things flowing together
and the result is music?
MAN: Men who are rich enough
provide places of needed
recreation for themselves.
They have done so from
the earliest periods known
in the history of the world.
The enjoyment of the choicest
natural scenes in the country
is thus a monopoly of a
very few, very rich people.
The great mass of society,
including those to whom it
would be of the greatest
benefit, is excluded from it.
Thus, unless steps are taken
by government to withhold them
from the grasp of individuals,
all places favorable
in scenery to the recreation
of the mind and body will be
closed against the great
body of the people.
Frederick Law Olmsted.
COYOTE: 4 months after the
Civil War ended, a small group
gathered in Yosemite Valley
to hear Frederick Law Olmsted,
the celebrated designer of
New York City's Central Park,
read a report he had written
about the future of the land
that had just been entrusted
to the state of California.
He called for strict
regulations to protect the
landscape from anything that
would, in his words, "obscure,
"distort, or detract from
the dignity of the scenery."
"In a place as special as
Yosemite," Olmsted said,
"the rights of posterity
were more important than
"the desires of the present."
MAN AS FREDERICK LAW OLMSTED:
Before many years if proper
facilities are offered,
these hundreds will become
thousands, and in a century,
the whole number of visitors
will be counted by millions.
An injury to the scenery so
slight that it may be unheeded
by any visitor now will be one
multiplied by those millions.
COYOTE: But once Olmsted
returned to New York, a small
group of Yosemite
commissioners secretly
convened, decided his
recommendations were too
controversial to bring to the
state legislature, and quietly
shelved his report.
Among those who studiously
ignored Olmsted's suggestions
on the future of Yosemite
was James Mason Hutchings.
No one had done more than
Hutchings to bring the valley
to the nation's attention,
but now that the nation had
moved to protect it in
perpetuity by declaring it
public, no one
fought that decision
with greater vehemence.
MAN: James Mason Hutchings
loved Yosemite, no doubt
about that, and every national
park will have somebody who
loves it deeply and then wants
to exploit the hell out of it.
The thing about James Mason
Hutchings is that once he gets
control of Yosemite Valley
he does exactly what most
concessionaires do with a
beautiful place like that.
He begins to make it into
another Niagara Falls.
You have to pay him for
the privilege of seeing
Yosemite Valley.
COYOTE: He had already given
up his publishing business
and bought one of the valley's
two hotels, which he quickly
renamed The Hutchings House.
He enjoyed lecturing his
guests and leading them
on sightseeing tours,
yet sometimes failed to
provide them with knives and
forks at dinner or forgetfully
filled their coffee
cups with cold water.
"Guests would be better
served," one of his early
customers wrote, "if the
proprietor paid less attention
"to describing the beauties and
more to providing comfortable
"beds and properly
prepared meals."
WOMAN: Upstairs, the rooms
were only divided by pieces
of cotton cloth, and it
required some little strategy
to place the candle so that
one's figure should not appear
on the cloth partition hugely
magnified for the amusement
of one's neighbors.
COYOTE: Hutchings was
technically a squatter
in Yosemite, but in brazen
defiance of the law, he went
about expanding
his operations.
To provide the lumber he
needed would require a sawmill
Hutchings decided and
someone to run it.
Just at that moment in the
fall of 1869, a 31-year-old
Scottish-born wanderer would
show up to apply for the job.
He called himself "an unknown
nobody," but he would do far
more than Hutchings to extol
the beauty of Yosemite,
more than Frederick Law
Olmsted to protect it,
and with his lyrical voice
infuse the national park idea
with the passion of
religious fervor.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: I know
that I could under ordinary
circumstances accumulate
wealth and obtain a fair
position in society, but I
am sure that the mind of no
truant schoolboy is more free
and disengaged from all the
grave plans and purposes and
pursuits of ordinary orthodox
life than mine.
John Muir.
I don't know how you ever
account for an extraordinary
individual like John Muir.
It's one of the
enduring human mysteries.
Out species is capable of such
pathetic, appalling narrowness
and occasionally of such
magnificent generosity.
I don't know how to
account for that.
COYOTE: John Muir was born in
Dunbar, Scotland, and raised
in Wisconsin, where he had
suffered a harsh childhood
at the hands of a tyrannical
father, an itinerant
Presbyterian minister who
insisted that Muir memorize
The Bible and repeatedly beat
him until by age 11 he was
able to recite 3/4
of The Old Testament
and the entire
New Testament by heart.
He was a natural-born
scientist, studied geology
and botany at the University
of Wisconsin, and coming
of age at a time when new
industries were transforming
post-war America, Muir also
showed great promise as
an inventor, increasing the
productivity of every one
of the businesses
that hired him.
DUNCAN: He went to work in
a carriage factory
in Indianapolis and did a sort
of time-motion study that said
the factory is like a machine
itself and the human beings
are parts of that.
He could have been
Andrew Carnegie, he could have
been--with his inventive genius,
he could have been
Thomas Edison, but something
inside of him drew him to
a different destiny.
COYOTE: A factory accident
temporarily blinded him
for several months.
When he regained his sight,
Muir fled his workday world
and set out on a thousand-mile
walk to Florida, pursuing his
passion for the natural
sciences, studying plants
and flowers, and beginning
a journal he would keep
for the rest of his life.
MAN: When Muir began that walk,
he was intending to walk
to South America and to
eventually find the headwaters
of the Amazon, build himself
a raft, and float down the
entire length of the Amazon.
Happily, he was discouraged
from doing so by a fever,
probably malaria that so
weakened him he decided that
going to the west coast and
what he had heard vaguely
of Yosemite might
be a better idea.
COYOTE: After getting off a
boat in San Francisco, he was
asked, "Where do
you wish to go?"
Muir answered,
"Anywhere that's wild."
POPE: And he walks.
The essence of John Muir
is the John Muir who walks.
He immediately sets off across
Pacheco Pass, across the
Central Valley to Yosemite,
and it is this act of walking
which actually creates a
faith for him, a new version
of Christianity,
a Christianity rooted in place
and wildness and nature.
It's a Christianity that is
not about the built worship
of God but about the
worship of God's creation.
COYOTE: Soon, he was rambling
across the Sierra Nevada,
the vast mountains he called
"the range of light, surely
"the brightest and best of
all the Lord has built."
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
We are now in the mountains,
and they are in us,
kindling enthusiasm, making
every nerve quiver, filling
every pore and cell of us.
Our flesh-and-bone tabernacle
seems transparent as glass to
the beauty about us, neither
old nor young, sick nor well,
but immortal.
COYOTE: Then he descended
into Yosemite Valley.
"It was," Muir wrote,
"by far the
"grandest of all the special
temples of nature I was ever
"permitted to enter,
the sanctum sanctorum
of the Sierra."
When Hutchings offered him the
job, he realized he could make
Yosemite his home.
Muir built Hutchings' sawmill
and began producing lumber
for the many projects his
new employer directed him to
undertake: replacing the
muslin sheets with wooden
partitions in the hotel's
sleeping quarters; improving
a space called The Big Tree
Room built around the trunk
of a giant cedar; and erecting
two additional cottages to
accommodate the increasing
number of tourists,
now exceeding 1,000 a summer.
For himself and a fellow
worker, Muir built a one-room
cabin near the base of
Yosemite falls complete
with a single window facing
the falls, a floor paved
with stones spaced far enough
apart to allow ferns to
continue growing, and a
small ditch that brought part
of the creek into a corner of
the cabin "with just enough
"current," Muir wrote,
"to allow it to sing
"and warble in low, sweet
tones, delightful at night
"while I lay in my bed
suspended from the rafters."
Every free moment Muir devoted
to exploring the valley
and the mountain ramparts
surrounding it, traveling
for days with only a few
pounds of crackers, oatmeal,
and tea for nourishment,
the soles of his shoes studded
with nails for clamoring up
rocky slopes, pondering
the geology of the Sierras,
closely inspecting everything
he encountered, thinking
nothing of covering 50 miles
in a two-day excursion.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
I drifted from rock to rock,
from stream to stream,
from grove to grove.
When I discovered a new plant,
I sat down beside it
for a minute or a day to make
its acquaintance and hear
what it had to tell.
I asked the boulders I met
whence they came and whither
they were going.
CRONON: One way to think
about John Muir is as a kind
of ecstatic holy man, a man
who is sort of in a berserk
rapture out there in nature
doing bizarre things that I
think most of us can't
imagine ever doing.
DUNCAN: He decided he
wanted to go see the brink
of Yosemite falls a few
thousand feet or so above
the canyon floor, and
something, he said,
impelled him not just to go
look but to crawl out over the
edge and bring himself along
the side of the canyon face
so he could be--experience
what the water felt when it
goes, leaps over the edge.
He went behind
Yosemite Falls, I mean,
crawling up just these very,
very dangerous,
slippery rocks.
I mean, he didn't have
pitons and ice axes.
He didn't have gear.
He climbed up so he could
stand right behind the falls.
He said, "I wanted to hear
the song of the waterfall."
STETSON: Some of the more
astonishing things he did
there was to ride a snow
avalanche to the bottom
of the valley, having spent
all day climbing to the top
of the Yosemite Valley walls
and then being swished to
the foot of that canyon in
just less than a minute.
DUNCAN: He was interested in
the animals, and he saw a bear
in a meadow and decided "If
I run at it, I can view it as
"what it looks like
when it's running."
Well, so he scampered and
made a bunch of noise.
The bear raised up
an didn't run at all.
He later called it "my
interview with the bear."
STETSON: An earthquake hit
Yosemite Valley, and Muir was
bounced from his bed and
ran outside, shouting,
"Noble earthquake!"
And as soon as a great section
of the wall had collapsed,
he was racing to see it.
[Thunder]
He celebrated trees by going
up, crawling up into the very
tops of them and letting
storms batter him so that he
understood what a storm
felt like to a tree.
WOMAN: John Muir saw
the spirituality
inherent in granite.
His view as a scientist and
his view as a deeply religious
man were the same view.
He had this wonderful sense
of ecstasy, having been born
every single day new when he
was in a wild, raw landscape.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
I am a captive, I am bound.
Love of pure, unblemished
nature seems to overmaster
and blur out of sight
all other objects
and considerations.
COYOTE: "It was all part,"
Muir said, of his
"unconditional
surrender to nature.
"The winds and cascading creeks
seemed to sing an exalting
"chorus audible to anyone
willing to listen."
He contemplated the life
of a raindrop, marveled
at the tenacity of plants
somehow clinging to life
on bare granite, soaked
sequoia cones in water
and drank the purple liquid.
"To improve my color,"
he explained, "and render
"myself more tree-wise
and sequoical."
Other times, he liked to put
his head down between his
knees and look at the world
upside down to see what he
called "its upness."
Everywhere Muir turned,
he believed he was witnessing
the work and presence of God,
not the stern and wrathful God
of his father, who placed man
above nature, but a God who
revealed himself through
nature and for whom mankind
was merely one part of a great,
joyously interconnected
web of being.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: I will
follow my instincts, be myself
for good or ill, and see
what will be the upshot.
As long as I live, I'll hear
waterfalls and birds
and winds sing.
I'll interpret the rocks,
learn the language of flood,
storm, and the avalanche.
I'll acquaint myself with
the glaciers and wild gardens
and get as near to the heart
of the world as I can.
EHRLICH: John Muir once said,
"By going out into the natural
world, I'm really going in."
He defined in that sentence
what it is to be a human being
because I think we're born
lost, and we remain lost until
we remove the shell of who
we think we are, all the
preconceptions of who we think
we are and to expose ourselves
to the great power of the
natural world and to let that
power reshape us the way
it's reshaped the rocks
of Yosemite Valley.
COYOTE: Muir now felt he had
discovered something else,
his own destiny.
The gaunt mountaineer with
blazing blue eyes and long
whiskers would devote
himself to understanding
the wilderness and then teach
others the lessons
he had learned.
If Yosemite was a temple,
he would be come its
high priest.
"Heaven knows," he wrote,
"that John the Baptist was not
"more eager to get all his
fellow sinners into the Jordan
"than I to baptize all
of mine in the beauty
"of God's mountains."
The man who seemed to talk
to flowers and rocks was
considered by many people
as an eccentric, one more
of Yosemite's curiosities.
On one excursion into the
mountains, he met a total
stranger and told him he
was rambling across
the Sierra Nevada
looking at trees.
"Oh, then,"
the stranger replied,
"you must be John Muir."
Josiah Whitney,
California's state geologist,
grew indignant when
he heard that Muir was
disputing his theory that
Yosemite had been created by
a cataclysmic collapse
of the valley floor.
Muir instead believed that
over thousands of years
glaciers had gouged out the
valley and polished smooth
the granite domes.
Whitney derided Muir as
"a mere sheep herder"
and "an ignoramus" and
scornfully dismissed
his conclusions,
but Muir persevered and in
1871 discovered a living
glacier in the recesses of the
Sierra, the first of 65 he
would eventually encounter and
study, and when he led other
geologists to his evidence,
they came to see that he was
right and Whitney was wrong.
Meanwhile, James Mason
Hutchings has persuaded his
friends in the California
Legislature to pass a special
bill exempting him from the
law that had set the valley
aside as public property,
and twice, the U.S. House of
Representatives was
willing to go along.
Both times, however, the Senate
held firm against him.
Hutchings sued, arguing all
the way to the U.S. Supreme
Court that the federal
government had no right to
dispose of public lands
for any purpose other than
private settlement.
Ruling against him, the High
Court established a precedent
that the act creating Yosemite
was in fact Constitutional.
In 1875, Hutchings
was evicted from his
hotel and banished
from the valley he had
so tirelessly promoted.
DUNCAN: James Mason Hutchings
did 3 very important things
for the national park idea.
First of all, he brought
Yosemite and its wonders to
the attention of the world.
Secondly, inadvertently,
by challenging the law that
set it aside and tried to kick
him out--by challenging that
all the way to the Supreme
Court, luckily, the Supreme
Court ruled that, in fact,
it was Constitutional to do.
So that was a very important
precedent that if it had gone
the other way who knows
what would have happened
with national parks.
The third and probably most
important thing is he hired
John Muir and helped introduce
him to the Yosemite Valley.
COYOTE: With the completion of
the Transcontinental Railroad,
even more tourists were
arriving in the par:
writers, artists, scientists,
and wealthy Easterners who
enjoyed listening to Muir
as he led them from one
spectacular viewpoint
to another.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
How little note is taken
at the deeds of nature.
What paper
publishes her reports?
Who publishes the sheet music
of the winds or the music
of water written
in river lines?
Who reports the works and ways
of the clouds, those wondrous
creations coming into being
every day like freshly
upheaved mountains?
COYOTE: But soon, John Muir
would leave Yosemite, too.
He packed his meager
belongings and moved to
Oakland, where he hoped to
spread his gospel of nature by
writing a series of reports
for the "Overland Monthly"
and other popular magazines.
"Writing," he said, "was
like the life of a glacier,
"one eternal grind," but over
the next several years,
that writing would help
articulate for millions
of Americans a deep and
abiding love for their land.
[Birds cawing]
MAN: Sacred means different
things to different people,
and to the American Indians,
sacredness means you can go in
there walk as
your ancestors did,
you can go in there and you
can see what the creator has
made for us, and you can feel
it, you can feel the spirits,
but we can take it
one step farther.
Because the environment is
still there as in the time
of creation, we believe
that it is still alive.
[Rumbling]
DUNCAN: In the early 1800s,
reports started filtering out
about this magical place.
John Colter, who had been a
member of the Lewis and Clark
expedition had left them
instead of returning to
civilization, became the first
legendary mountain man, and he
came back with a tale of a
place where mud was boiling,
where steam was coming out
of the ground, water spouted,
and people sort
of made fun of it.
They called it Colter's Hell.
Joe Meek, the mountain man,
stumbled upon it and said it
reminded him of the place that
the preachers had warned him
about back when he
went to church.
COYOTE: Jim Bridger, another
mountain man, had also told
tales of the place, the
long-time home of the
Sheepeater Band of Shoshone
Indians and a meeting place
for half a dozen other tribes.
It included a lake,
he claimed, where a man could
catch a fish in one spot and
then swing his line over a few
feet to instantly cook his
catch in a hot spring.
"There was a canyon so deep,"
he added, "that a man could
"shout down into it at night
and be awakened by his echo
"the next morning."
As late at 1869, a group of
prospectors had ventured into
the area they called the
Valley of Death, but when they
finally wrote a detailed
account of their journey,
magazines in the East
refused to publish it.
"Thank you," one editor
responded, "but we do not
"print fiction."
[Horse neighs]
Then in the late summer of
1870, a much more prestigious
group intended to put an end
to the mystery and either
confirm or deny the
rumors once and for all.
Accompanied by a small
military escort, they included
a prominent banker, a son of a
United States Senator,
a part-time newspaper
correspondent,
and Truman C. Everts, at age
54 the oldest member
of the expedition,
a Vermonter who had
come along on a lark.
The moving force behind
the expedition was
Nathaniel P. Langford,
a well-connected
Montana politician who
believed the future prosperity
of the territory rested
with completion of a proposed
second transcontinental
railway, The Northern Pacific.
Earlier in the year, Langford
had met privately with
Jay Cooke, the financier
underwriting $100 million
worth of Northern Pacific bonds.
The two had agreed that any
publicity about the region's
attractions would be good
for the territory, good
for The Northern Pacific's
bond sales, and good
for Nathaniel Langford.
MAN: And we know that Langford
was actually in the employ
of Northern Pacific.
He seemed to always--no matter
where else he was, he seemed
to always be near the till.
COYOTE: Two weeks into his
expedition's journey, Langford
came across the kind of
scenery the mountain men
had described.
MAN AS NATHANIEL LANGFORD:
We came suddenly upon a basin
of boiling sulfur springs,
boiling like a cauldron,
throwing water and fearful
volumes of vapor higher
than our heads.
The spring lying to the east
of this, more diabolical
in appearance and
filled with a hot,
brownish substance of the
consistency of mucilage,
is in constant, noisy
ebullition, emitting fumes
of a villainous odor.
COYOTE: They kept moving
past more mud pots that made
noises, they said, "like the
safety valve of a laboring
"steamboat engine," over ground
that sounded hollow under
their horses' hooves,
near vents that were too hot
too touch even with gloved
hands, places to which they
would attach names like
Hell Broth Springs,
Hell Roaring River,
Devil's Den, Brimstone Basin.
Farther on, they came to two
waterfalls slicing through
a steep and narrow canyon
they estimated at half a mile
in depth, the one Jim Bridger
had once bragged about,
the Grand Canyon
of the Yellowstone.
Langford was now convinced
that the Yellowstone could be
an even greater attraction
than he and the backers
of The Northern Pacific
had dreamed.
During their exploration,
the nearsighted Truman Everts
somehow got separated from the
main group and went missing.
Over the next several days,
search parties were
dispatched to find him.
They encountered grizzly bears,
heard the howls
of wolves, but found no trace
of Everts or his horse.
On September 13, a surprise
storm dropped two feet
of snow on them.
Running low on supplies,
the expedition had no choice
but to turn for home, leaving
notes behind for Everts
at each campsite along with
what little food they could
spare from their own
dwindling rations.
Heading for the Madison River
and the mining town
of Virginia City, they
struggled for days through
snow and dense timber
until they came upon
a large clearing.
MAN AS NATHANIEL LANGFORD:
We had already seen what we
believed to be the greatest
wonders on the continent.
Judge then of our astonishment
on entering this basin to see
at no great distance before us
an immense body of sparkling
water projected suddenly and
with terrific force into
the air to the height
of over 100 feet.
General Washburn has named
it Old Faithful because
of the regularity of its
eruptions, the intervals
between which being
from 60 to 65 minutes.
COYOTE: They gave names to
the other geysers, too--
The Castle, The Bee Hive, and
The Giant--but because of their
shortage of food could not
stay long amidst the wonders
surrounding them.
Yet as they followed the
steaming Firehole River,
they came across still
more basins and still more
curiosities, the greatest
concentration of geothermal
features on Earth, a vast
array of geysers, fumaroles,
mud pots, and hot springs
of unimaginable strangeness
and beauty.
When the expedition finally
reached Virginia City and then
Helena, the big news was
Langford's confirmation
of what had been considered
wild rumors about a place once
called Colter's Hell, but the
even bigger news was that
Truman Everts was
still lost there.
MAN AS TRUMAN EVERTS:
On the day that I found myself
separated from my company,
our course had been impeded by
the dense growth
of the pine forest.
As separations like this had
frequently occurred, it gave
me no alarm, and I rode on in
the direction which I supposed
had been taken until
darkness overtook me.
I selected a spot for
comfortable repose,
picketed my horse, built a fire,
and went to sleep.
COYOTE: At first, Everts
thought his separation from
the expedition would be a
momentary inconvenience,
but on the second day,
his horse ran away, taking
with it his guns, blankets,
fishing tackle, and matches,
everything but the clothes on
his back, a small opera glass,
and two knives, which the
hapless Everts promptly managed
to lose in the underbrush.
MAN AS TRUMAN EVERTS:
I realized I was lost.
Then came a crushing sense of
destitution--no food, no fire,
no means to procure either,
alone in an unexplored
wilderness 150 miles from
the nearest human abode,
surrounded by wild beasts,
and famishing with hunger.
WHITTLESEY: He didn't
have any matches.
All he had was an opera glass,
and it took him quite a while
to figure out he could make
a fire with the opera glass.
DUNCAN: Then he finally
figured out that
"if it's no sunny,
I can't start a fire."
So he learned that he had to
keep a stick burning, so you
can imagine him stumbling
around midday with a burning
stick, emaciated.
I mean, this was not John Muir
in ecstasy becoming
one with nature.
This was a horrific ordeal for
a poor guy who just got lost
at the wrong time.
COYOTE: He wandered for days,
vainly searching for his
friends or any sign
of their trail.
He spent a night in a tree
cowering from a mountain lion
prowling underneath, suffered
frostbite on his feet from
the snowstorm that blanketed
the region and saturated his
clothes, found refuge for a
week huddling day and night
against the warm ground of
one of the thermal features.
MAN AS TRUMAN EVERTS:
I was enveloped
in a perpetual steam bath.
At first, this was barely
preferable to the storm,
but I soon became
accustomed to it,
and before I left, though
thoroughly parboiled,
actually enjoyed it.
COYOTE: At another hot spring,
Everts broke through the thin
crust of earth, and his hip
was severely scalded by steam.
One evening in his sleep,
he lurched forward into his
fire and burned his hands.
Wasting away from exhaustion
and hunger, Everts began
seeing apparitions
and hearing voices.
"I will not perish in this
wilderness," he told himself
and forced himself onward,
retracing the route that had
originally brought the
expedition into
the Yellowstone Plateau.
On October 16, 37 days after
being separated from the
expedition, Everts was found
crawling along a hillside.
His starvation diet of thistle
roots had reduced him to
a mere 50 pounds.
The scalded flesh on his
thighs was blackened.
His bare and frostbitten feet
had been worn to the bone.
His burnt fingers were said to
resemble birds' claws.
He was incoherent for days,
though he slowly recovered
and in time produced a widely
read account of his ordeal
that "Scribner's Monthly"
published for
popular consumption.
MAN AS TRUMAN EVERTS:
My narrative is finished.
The time is not far
distant when the wonders
of the Yellowstone will be
made accessible to all lovers
of sublimity and novelty in
natural scenery, and when
that day arrives, I hope in
happier mood and under more
auspicious circumstances to
revisit scenes fraught for me
with such mingled
glories and terrors.
Truman Everts.
[Wolf howls]
BAKER: Every time I hear about
the white people coming into
our national parks and
discovering something,
I can almost see them standing
there on top of this mountain,
3 or 4 of them saying,
"From now on, we'll call those
"mountains so and so because
we're the first ones here."
In the meantime, I can see my
relatives hiding behind
the rocks, looking at them,
saying, "Wow. What are these
"guys doing up here?"
For us, it was almost
kind of humorous
because we've been there for
thousands upon thousands
of years, and it didn't
need to be discovered.
It was never lost.
All they had to do was ask us.
All they had to do was get
together with the tribes,
"OK. What's there?"
And we could have told them.
COYOTE: In the summer of 1871,
the United States government
decided it was time for
professionals to take a look
at the place where
Truman Everts had gotten
so helplessly lost.
Ferdinand Hayden, who had
been exploring other parts
of the West, now led an
expedition of topographers,
botanists, zoologists,
and mineralogists to
Yellowstone to determine once
and for all its real value,
but perhaps even more
important than the scientists
was the presence of two other
men, a young artist named
Thomas Moran, who had
never ridden a horse before
and required a pillow on his
saddle, and William Henry
Jackson, a photographer from
Omaha who most recently had
chronicled the building of the
Transcontinental Railroad.
For the first time, Americans
could see what mere words had
previously described.
As Ferdinand Hayden prepared
the report that Congress was
expecting, he received an
intriguing letter from a man
named A.B. Nettleton, a
shrewd lobbyist working
for The Northern Pacific,
suggesting that Hayden do more
than merely catalog
his discoveries.
MAN AS A.B. NETTLETON: Dear,
Dr. Hayden, let Congress pass
a bill reserving the great
geyser basin as a public park
forever just as it has
reserved the Yosemite Valley
and Big Trees.
If you approve this, would
such a recommendation be
appropriate in your
official report?
COYOTE: Hayden was
happy to oblige.
His report took pains to
assure Congress that
at an elevation of 6,000 feet
above sea level or higher the
Yellowstone region was totally
unsuitable for farming
and ranching and that because
of its volcanic origins no
valuable mines were likely
to be found there, but,
he warned, if congress did
not protect Yellowstone from
private development, it would
become another Niagara Falls,
another national
embarrassment.
RUNTE: Well, if there had been
gold next to the geysers
in Yellowstone, there would
not be geysers in Yellowstone,
and if there had been a big
gold strike in the Yosemite
Valley, Yosemite Valley would
have been a mining pit,
and the reason for that
is that it was still very,
very difficult for the
American people to relent from
their commercial pursuits.
COYOTE: With The Northern
Pacific quietly maneuvering
behind the scenes and with
Moran's sketches and Jackson's
photographs prominently
displayed in the halls
of the Capitol, a bill began
moving through congress,
and by late January of 1872,
it was ready for action
in the Senate.
MAN: Be it enacted that the
tract of land lying near
the headwaters of the
Yellowstone River...
COYOTE: The senate
overwhelmingly
approved the bill.
The house passed it 115-65,
and on March 1, 1872,
President Ulysses S. Grant
signed the bill creating
Yellowstone Park.
Unlike Yosemite, which was
being administered by
the state of California,
this would be a national park,
the first national park in
the history of the world.
You wish that they had,
you know, gone out and rang
bells to say, "This is
something new on Earth,"
because it was.
A federal government was
saying, "We're setting this
aside as a national park."
No government had ever done
that before, and you'd like
them to make note of it in
that way just the way with the
Declaration of Independence
they read it
and bells were rung.
That didn't happen with this.
It looks like they took it
maybe a little more seriously
than the decision of
whether or not to repaint
the cloak room.
It wasn't that big
a deal to most of them.
It was just business
as usual that day.
It's only hindsight
that allows us to see
what they started.
You know, they were kicking
the rock off the cliff,
and most of them turned
and walked away.
There's no evidence that any
of them thought this was
the first of a type or that
"we're going to turn this into
"a hugely important
world institution."
COYOTE: The "New York Herald"
saw the new creation as one
more reason for
national bragging rights.
"Why should we go to
Switzerland to see mountains
"or to Iceland for geysers?"
it asked, adding that
"with Yosemite and Yellowstone,
now we have attractions which
"diminish Niagara into
an ordinary exhibition."
But the "Helena Rocky Mountain
Gazette" complained that
a great blow had been struck
against the prosperity
of the region.
"The new park," it said,
"will keep the country
"a wilderness and prevent
economic development."
Its cross-town rival the
"Helena Herald" disagreed.
"It will be a park,"
the paper said,
"worthy of the great republic."
DUNCAN: I think that
if Wyoming had been
a state in 1872,
they probably would have
followed the Yosemite model.
They would have just given
it to the state of Wyoming
for safekeeping, but because
it was a territory, there was
no state to give it to, and so
therefore, almost by accident,
it became a national park,
and that doesn't seem like
a big thing at first, but when
you think about it, it really
was an incredible
turning point.
What would we think of
Yellowstone if it was
Yellowstone State
Park in Wyoming?
It would still be--the
geysers would be going off,
the waterfall would still be
there, the mud would still be
boiling, we'd be attracted to
go see it, but we wouldn't
feel the sense of
responsibility to it as
a citizen of our nation,
only if we were a citizen
of the state of Wyoming.
By making it a national park,
implicitly it becomes
ours, everybody's.
We're all somehow
responsible for it,
and we all can take pride in
it, and so by this accident
more or less, this precedent
was set that it's gonna be
a national park that we as a
nation have to take care of.
COYOTE: By any standard,
the new national park
at Yellowstone was huge,
more than 2 million acres
of remote mountainous terrain
covering the northwestern
corner of Wyoming Territory
and spilling into Montana
and Idaho, bigger than
the states of Delaware
and Rhode Island combined,
more than 50 times
larger than the Yosemite Grant
in California,
but having created the world's
first national park,
Congress had seen no reason to
appropriate any money to
manage it or protect it from
the people who
were sure to come.
WOMAN: Our first site of
geysers made us simply wild
with the eagerness of
seeing all things at once.
We ran and shouted
and called to each other
to see this or that.
We had at last
reached Wonderland.
Emma Cowan.
COYOTE: In August of 1877,
a group of 9 tourists from
Montana had entered the park
bent on taking in the sights.
Among them were Emma Cowan,
24 years old, and her husband
George, planning to celebrate
their second wedding
anniversary in Yellowstone.
WOMAN AS EMMA COWAN: We seemed
to be in a world of our own.
Not a soul had we seen
save our own party.
One can scarcely realize the
intense solitude which then
pervaded this land fresh
from the Maker's hand.
COYOTE: On the morning of
their anniversary, the Cowans
stepped outside their tent
and found themselves not only
in the middle of the world's
first national park
but in the middle of
an Indian war.
WOMAN AS EMMA COWAN:
A pistol shot rang out.
My husband's head fell back.
A red stream trickled down
his face from beneath his hat.
COYOTE: Chief Joseph and
hundreds of his Nez Perce Tribe
were streaming through
the park, pursued by
the U.S. Army because they had
refused to move onto
a reservation in Idaho.
Only two weeks earlier, nearly
90 of them had been killed,
more than half women and
children, when their sleeping
village had been attacked in
The Battle of the Big Hole.
Some of the young warriors
were still incensed
about the casualties they had
suffered and ignored Joseph's
instructions not to harm
any white civilians.
[Hoofbeats]
As the Nez Perce continued
their flight through
Yellowstone, there were
other incidents
with unlucky tourists.
Several were wounded,
and two were killed.
Moving through a few days
behind the Indians, the army
picked up the survivors.
Among them was George Cowan,
somehow still alive.
Army surgeons probed his head
by candlelight and removed
the bullet, flattened
by his skull.
By the time he was reunited
with his wife, the Nez Perce War
was ending hundreds of
miles away with Chief Joseph's
surrender in northern Montana.
Yellowstone's superintendent
soon arranged for the native
Sheepeaters, who had not taken
part in the troubles, to be
evicted from their homeland
so he could assure the public
that Yellowstone National Park
was now free of all Indians.
Years later when the Cowans
returned to visit the park,
Emma would say she was
surprised any of her group had
been spared given
the horrible treatment
the Indians had suffered.
George meanwhile happily
recounted their tale of their
second anniversary and then
capped his story by showing
off his proudest Yellowstone
souvenir, the bullet that had
been removed from his skull,
which he had made into
a watch fob.
[Train chugging]
[Whistle blowing]
[Bell clangs]
MAN: I had a vision of the
future of this great country.
The iron horse had jumped the
Missouri and was rushing up
the bountiful valley of the
Yellowstone, carrying with it
all its civilization and change.
Instead of the teepees of
the wild red men, there were
thousands of beautiful homes.
In the bottomlands waved
the rich grain,
giving bread to millions.
The hillsides were covered
with stock, supplying
the world its meat, and still
thundered on the iron horse up
over the Rocky Mountains,
and I thanked God that right
in the heart of all this noise
and restless life of millions
a wise government had forever
set apart that marvelous
region as a national park.
Colgate Hoyt.
SCHULLERY: As early as 1871,
they began to call Yellowstone
Wonderland because "Alice
in Wonderland," the book,
had just appeared
a few years earlier,
and The Northern Pacific
Railroad took that
right up and began to produce
pamphlets, brochures,
and guidebooks all
with the title "Wonderland."
COYOTE: In 1883, The Northern
Pacific Railroad was finally
completed across
the continent.
Now tourists from the East,
well-to-do refugees from the
increasingly industrialized
and crowded cities
of the Gilded Age, could reach
the entrance to Yellowstone
National Park in relative
comfort and speed.
That first year,
attendance increased 5-fold.
Everything, the hotel,
the food, the tents,
the stages, the guides,
was now under the exclusive
control of the Yellowstone
Park Improvement Company,
a politically well-connected
firm with close ties to
The Northern Pacific.
They had quietly arranged for
the secretary of the interior
to grant the company
a remarkable monopoly
within the park.
For a fee of only $2.00 an
acre, the lease allowed the
company to cut as much timber
as it needed, kill elk, deer,
and bison in the park to feed
their work crews and guests,
plant crops and graze horses
and cattle wherever they
wished, even mine coal for
their furnaces and rechannel
some of the hot springs
to heat the buildings.
As if that weren't enough,
the contract granted the
company the right to choose
parcels of 640 acres,
one square mile,
at 7 different locations
within the park.
The prime attractions of
Yellowstone were about to be
completely surrounded
and exploited.
MAN: The project of the worthy
speculators, who are after
the people's pleasure ground,
appears to be flourishing.
Here and there are feeble
voices raised in protest against
the steal, but with a powerful
lobby to back them and no
opposition from the interior
department, the grabbers have
little to fear.
The park is at
present all our own.
How would the readers like
to see it become a second
Niagara, a place where one
goes only to be fleeced,
where patent medicine
advertisements stare one
in the face, and the beauties
of nature have all been
defiled by the greed of man?
George Bird Grinnell.
COYOTE: George Bird Grinnell
of New York City had been
educated at Yale in
ornithology and paleontology
and had made several trips to
the West to collect specimens
as a young man, including an
1875 excursion to Yellowstone,
which had instilled in him
a deep love of the new park
and a fierce desire to
protect it and its wildlife.
Having sold his father's
investment business, Grinnell
had taken control of
"Forest and Stream,"
a sportsman's magazine he now
used to champion his causes.
Yellowstone was one of them,
and he began a crusade to stop
what he called
"the park grab."
Grinnell's fight against the
railroad interests was soon
joined by an unlikely ally,
General Philip Sheridan,
a cavalry hero of the
Civil War and celebrated Indian
fighter, who was now commander
of the U.S. Army
for much of the West.
MAN AS PHILIP SHERIDAN:
I regretted exceedingly to learn
that the national park
had been rented out to
private parties.
The improvements in the
park should be national,
and the control of it in
the hands of an officer
of the government.
I can keep sufficient troops
in the park to accomplish this
object and give a place
of refuge and safety
for our noble game.
[Galloping]
COYOTE: Sheridan even
suggested that Yellowstone
should be expanded by more
than 3,000 square miles,
doubled in size
to provide greater
protection for the elk and
buffalo by conforming the
park's boundaries to their
seasonal migrations.
It was a radical idea
immediately opposed by Western
politicians, who believed
that Yellowstone was
already too big.
In Washington, Grinnell
took on the railroad lobby
directly, calling for an
investigation into the park
contracts, proposing an
expansion of Yellowstone,
and trying to write park
regulations concerning
hunting into law.
The debate that followed would
be echoed in every debate
on national parks
for the next century.
[Gavel bangs]
MAN: I do not understand
myself what the necessity is
for the government entering
into the show business
in the Yellowstone
National Park.
I should be very glad myself
to see it surveyed and sold,
leaving it to
private enterprise.
Senator John Ingalls, Kansas.
MAN: The great curse of this
age and of the American people
is its materialistic tendencies.
"Money, money" is the
cry everywhere
until our people
are held up already
to the world as noted
for nothing except
the acquisition of money.
I am not ashamed to say that
I shall vote to perpetuate
this park
for the American people.
There should be to a nation
that will have 100 million or
150 million people a park
like this as a great breathing
place for the national lungs.
Senator George Vest, Missouri.
COYOTE: The bill to expand
Yellowstone failed, though
Congress did appropriate
$40,000 for its maintenance.
In the next few years,
proposals were made to shrink
the park, to place it under
Montana's legal jurisdiction,
or to follow the Yosemite
example and simply turn
the park over to Wyoming once
the territory became a state.
George Bird Grinnell
would have none of it.
"Leave the people's park
alone," he declared.
He tried valiantly to stop
each attack on Yellowstone
until August 4, 1886,
when Congress stripped away
any money to protect the park.
For the moment it seemed,
Yellowstone would have to
fend for itself.
Coming to the rescue,
Lieutenant General
Philip Sheridan gladly
dispatched Troop "M" of the
1st United States Cavalry
to take control of the world's
first national park.
They arrived believing,
as everyone else did,
that military supervision
of Yellowstone would be
a temporary stopgap.
30 years later, the cavalry
would still be there.
[Clock ticking]
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: I am
losing precious days.
I am degenerating into a
machine for making money.
I am learning nothing in
this trivial world of men.
I must break away and get
out into the mountains to
learn the news.
COYOTE: For 5 years, John Muir
had tried his best to confine
himself to his writing desk in
Oakland, California, turning
out article after article
for the "Overland Monthly,"
"Scribner's," and "Harper's"
magazine about the majesty
of Yosemite
and the Sierra Nevada,
about the necessity
to preserve forests from
destruction, and about the joy
to be found in quietly
observing the world, all part
of his desire, he said,
to "preach nature
"like an apostle."
In the process, he had become
famous, but he had soon grown
restless to travel again,
and when the opportunity came
to visit Alaska, a vast
wilderness that had been part
of the United States
for barely a decade,
he had jumped at the chance.
At Fort Wrangell, hearing talk
of a remote and unexplored
area lined with glaciers,
he had hired 4 Tlingit Indians
and their big canoe to
make the long 800-mile
journey there.
It was Glacier Bay.
Here, the glaciers marched
right down to the sea and were
of an entirely different scale
from the remnants Muir had
tracked down high in
the Sierra Nevada.
"Alaska," he wrote,
"is nature's own reservation,
"and every lover of wildness
will rejoice with me that by
"kindly frost it is
so well- preserved."
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: Glaciers,
back in their white solitudes,
work apart from men, exerting
their tremendous energies
in silence and darkness.
Outspread spirit-like,
brooding above predestined
landscapes, they work on
unwearied through immeasurable
ages until in the fullness of
time the mountains and valleys
are brought forth, channels
furrowed for rivers, basins
for lakes and meadows,
and soil spread for forests
and fields.
Then they shrink and
vanish like summer clouds.
He camps out on the glacier,
and he's been diagnosed as
having a deep cough.
He goes out and sleeps on the
glacier and loses his cough,
says that "no lowland microbe
can survive on a glacier."
He said, "Any man that
does not believe in God
"and glaciers is the worst
kind of unbeliever."
COYOTE: The conversations he
shared around the campfire
with his Tlingit companions
exposed him for the first time
to Indian beliefs.
"Don't you believe
wolves have souls?"
one of them asked, and the
discussion that followed
impressed upon Muir that they
held views of the natural
world not that much
different from his own.
BAKER: John Muir would have
made a great medicine man
in his day because he
would feel the same things
an American Indian would
because he was listening,
he was truly listening.
He wasn't exploring.
He was living, he was
learning, he was living
with the elements out there,
and John Muir would have been
part of it just like the
elders that I knew were part
of the environment.
COYOTE: After his return
from Alaska, he married
Louie Wanda Strentzel,
the reclusive daughter
of a prosperous fruit grower
and settled down on her
parents' estate near the town
of Martinez in
California's Alhambra Valley.
Two children quickly followed,
and Muir single-mindedly threw
himself into providing for his
family, taking over management
of his in-laws' 3,000 acres,
bringing to bear the same
intensity and mechanical
inventiveness he had
demonstrated as a young man.
He improved the farm's
productivity, converting extra
land from pasture into cash
crops of cherries,
Tokay grapes, and Bartlett pears
and steadily amassed
considerable wealth.
Muir was tender and devoted
to his wife and daughters,
but his health deteriorated
from the ceaseless dawn to
dusk farm work and his
isolation from the mountains
and forests and glaciers
that had always seemed to
replenish him.
He lost weight.
He'd become "nerve-shaken and
lean as a crow," he wrote his
brother, "loaded with care,
work, and worry."
The result was that he was
slowly weaning himself away
from all that had compelled
him in his life up to that
point, and his--his wife
essentially said,
"You've got to go out
and engage the wilderness."
COYOTE: In 1888, Louie Muir
persuaded her husband to take
another outing to
Mount Rainier in the state
of Washington, where he camped
at what he called "the most
"extravagantly beautiful of
all the Alpine gardens I ever
"beheld with a volcanic cone
looming overhead reflected
"in a crystalline blue lake."
Captivated by the view,
he felt some of his old energy
returning, and when the young
men camping with him set off
on a grueling 7 1/2-hour climb
up the 14,000-foot peak,
the 50-year-old Muir
impulsively joined them.
"Did not mean to climb it,"
Muir wrote his wife later,
"but got excited and
soon was on top."
The climb, he said, had left
him "with heart and limb
"exultant and free."
STETSON: By the time he came
down from that mountain,
he understood that his real
passion and his energy should
be devoted to preserving such
places, and that's where he
went from there.
COYOTE: Louie Muir, meanwhile,
had written her husband
a letter that released
him just as surely as
the thrilling vista from
Rainier's mountaintop.
WOMAN AS LOUIE MUIR: My dear
John, a ranch that needs
and takes the sacrifice of a
noble life ought to be flung
away beyond all reach
and power for harm.
The Alaska book and the
Yosemite book, dear John,
must be written, and you need
to be your own self, well
and strong, to make
them worthy of you.
COYOTE: In 1889,
Robert Underwood Johnson,
an editor of
"The Century Magazine,"
arrived from the East and asked
Muir for a tour of Yosemite.
In the last 8 years, Muir had
managed only one brief visit
to the place that had
changed his life,
and he eagerly accepted.
But as they approached
Yosemite Valley, he began
seeing disturbing signs.
Tunnels had been carved through
the heart of some of the big
trees as gaudy tourist
attractions to entice visitors
to use one road over another.
In the valley itself, he found
piles of tin cans and other
garbage in plain view, and the
meadows had been converted into
hay fields and pastures,
even a hog pen "whose stink,"
Muir wrote, "has got into
the pores of the rocks."
He was dismayed to learn of
plans to throw colored lights
upon the majestic waterfalls
as if that would make them
more beautiful.
"Perhaps," he said, "we may
yet hear of an appropriation
"to whitewash the face
of El Capitan or correct
"the curves of the domes."
Glacier Point, 3,254 feet
above the valley, had been one
of Muir's favorite spots from
which to contemplate the place
he considered
nature's cathedral.
Now it was a place
where tourists mugged
for the camera.
An entrepreneur named
James McCauley had built
the Mountain House Hotel there.
On summer nights, his sons
would collect donations from
tourists for a firefall in
which McCauley would build
a huge bonfire and then light
sticks of dynamite to send
the fire cascading over
the sheer cliff.
The crowds loved it.
[Cheering]
DUNCAN: Muir came back
into the Yosemite Valley,
his cathedral, and his
cathedral had been turned
into a carnival.
It wasn't what he
envisioned it should be.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: Like
anything else worthwhile,
however well guarded,
they have always been subject
to attack by despoiling
gain-seekers and mischief-makers
of every degree from Satan to
senators, eagerly trying to
make everything immediately
and selfishly commercial.
Thus long ago, a few
enterprising merchants
utilized the Jerusalem temple
as a place of business instead
of a place of prayer,
and earlier still, the first
forest reservation,
including only one tree,
was likewise despoiled.
COYOTE: Distressed at
everything he saw within
Yosemite Valley, Muir
fled with his guest
Robert Underwood Johnson
into the high country,
but here, too, much had changed.
Beyond the boundaries of the
Yosemite Grant and therefore
unprotected by even the
lackluster vigilance
of the state, the headwaters
of the streams feeding into
the valley had been left to
the mercy of the lumbermen
and sheep herders.
That evening at their camp in
Tuolumne Meadows, Muir spoke
passionately about
what they had seen.
"The harm they do goes to the
heart," he said of the sheep,
and he predicted that if
the destruction continued
unchecked without the trees
and grasses of the high Sierra
to trap and hold the winter
snows, the springtime melts
would become swifter and more
destructive, the clear streams
would become muddy with silt,
and by summertime, the valley
and the waterfalls that
nourished it would be dry.
Johnson suggested that the
high country be set aside as
a national park and urged Muir
to become the public voice
for the campaign by writing
articles again describing not
only the region's beauty
but its vulnerability.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
The mountains are
fountains of men,
as well as of rivers,
of glaciers, of fertile soil.
The great poets, philosophers,
prophets, able men whose
thoughts and deeds have moved
the world, have come down from
the mountains, mountain
dwellers who have grown strong
there with the forest trees
in Nature's workshops.
CRONON: Muir in a way comes
from a literary rhetorical
tradition that for most modern
Americans has been lost,
that comes from--as with
Abraham Lincoln with whom,
I think, he has a lot in
common--that knowing
The Bible chapter and verse,
the entire text, knowing
Shakespeare, these sort of
classic literary roots that
are as fundamental to the way
so many literate Americans are
educated in the 19th Century,
and Muir has that language,
this rapturous, religious,
rhetorical set of images that
he has at his fingertips,
and he maps them onto his
concrete experiences out
in these natural settings
in a way that makes
them transcendent.
COYOTE: Muir threw himself
into what became a pitched
battle to preserve
the high country.
Vested interests and opposing
politicians lied about his
past, questioned his motives,
and publicly impugned
his integrity.
Muir was hurt but endured it
all, going directly to
the people, who soon
flooded Congress
with letters and petitions.
Finally on October 1, 1890,
President Benjamin Harrison
signed into law a bill creating
Yosemite National Park,
setting aside more
than 900,000 acres,
nearly 1,500 square miles.
Muir was disappointed that
the original Yosemite Grant
encompassing the valley floor
and the Mariposa Grove was
still left under state control,
but this new park was
30 times bigger and, to Muir's
delight, included one of his
favorite places on Earth,
the nearby Hetch Hetchy Valley,
which he considered
"a grand landscape garden,
"one of nature's rarest and most
precious mountain temples."
At the same time as the
Yosemite Bill, two more groves
of big trees on the western
flank of the Sierras had also
been preserved as Sequoia and
General Grant National Parks.
"The majestic sequoia is the
king of the conifers,"
Muir had written, "the noblest
of all the noble race."
There were now 4
national parks.
Flushed with the success
of his first venture into
the world of politics,
Muir immediately began
making new plans.
He wanted more parks,
bigger parks, and more park
supporters to defend them
against the enemies he knew
would oppose them.
He was right.
In the years to come,
the battle over parks would
intensify, threatening
even his own precious
mountain temple.
John Muir was 52
years old now.
It had been nearly
a quarter century since,
as a self-described
"unknown nobody,"
he had first entered Yosemite
and then been transformed
by his "unconditional
surrender to nature."
He would need to convince
many other Americans to
surrender, as well,
to see the necessity, as he
said, "in all that is wild."
CRONON: What he means is that
wildness is an essential part
of ourselves that our ordinary
lives tempt us to forget,
and by losing touch with that
essential part of ourselves,
we risk losing our souls,
and so for him,
going out into nature to
these parks is how we recover
ourselves, remember who we
truly are, and reconnect
with the core roots of our
own identity, of our own
spirituality, that which is
sacred in our experience.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
The tendency nowadays to wander
in wilderness is
delightful to see.
Thousands of tired,
nerve-shaken,
overcivilized people
are beginning to find out
that going to the mountains is
going home, that wildness is
a necessity, and that mountain
parks and reservations are
useful, not only as fountains
of timber and irrigating rivers
but as fountains of life.
John Muir.